# Essential Flutter Widgets

In the previous chapters we've gotten familiar with Dart, the basic structure of a starter Flutter
project, and the three different trees driving the framework.

Now we'll take a look at some fundamental widgets that you'll encounter in many Flutter projects
along with basic UI elements and layouts.

> To start each example from the [chapter's demo project](/projects/chapters/chapter_03), we can use the `flutter run -t lib/main.dart` command, changing `main.dart` to the file we want to be the entry point of the app.
>
> In Android Studio, we can create a *run configuration* for each entry point file. This way we can easily tell Android Studio and the Flutter tools which file should they consider the entry point of the app when building and running it.
>
> // TODO add image of an AS run config

## The App Widgets

While we definitely *could* build every aspect of a Flutter app ourselves from the ground up, it
doesn't mean we really *should* go down that path.

The [`WidgetsApp`](https://api.flutter.dev/flutter/widgets/WidgetsApp-class.html) widget is there to
provide basic functionality for apps.

By using a `WidgetsApp` as the direct child of our app widget, it makes implementing the
following functionalities really straightforward:

- Defining the default text style for every widget in the app
- Handling localization
- Navigation between pages (screens)
- Handling overlays, like dialogs that can be displayed over other content

`WidgetsApp` seems to be a class with a lot of responsibilities, but it delegates these
responsibilities to other widgets under the hood,
like [`DefaultTextStyle`](https://api.flutter.dev/flutter/widgets/DefaultTextStyle-class.html),
or [`Navigator`](https://api.flutter.dev/flutter/widgets/Navigator-class.html).

If our goal was to build a game with widgets only, or to build a regular app with our own design
language, `WidgetsApp` pretty much has us covered.

A really simple app with a single page looks something like this:

// TODO Code from chapter_03/00_widgets_app

However, Flutter has built-in support for [Material Design](https://material.io/), Google's
all-around design language, and even for
Apple's [Human Interface Guidelines on iOS](https://developer.apple.com/design/human-interface-guidelines/ios/)
. Flutter's implementation of the latter is called Cupertino.

> As we already know from the previous chapters, Flutter is using the supported platforms' native canvases to render UI widgets.
> This means that _technically_ we can build an app using Cupertino UI widgets only, and the app will run on all supported platforms, though due to licensing issues, Cupertino won't have the correct fonts on any other platform than iOS or macOS.
> // TODO Screenshot of a Cupertino app (like Hello world) on an Android emulator and iOS simulator

Let's take a closer look at some app building blocks from the aforementioned implementations.

## Material Design app basics

### MaterialApp

`MaterialApp` is a `StatefulWidget` wrapping many other widgets that are required for material
design applications. It builds upon and extends the functionality of a `WidgetsApp`.

One of the functionalities that `MaterialApp` offers is Material-specific navigation handling (
navigation meaning navigating between pages). We'll get back to discussing navigation in Chapter 5
of this material.

`MaterialApp` is also responsible for providing default theme and style values for Material widgets.

#### ThemeData

We can use `ThemeData` objects to configure themes for Material apps.

Material theme colors (like `primaryColor` or `accentColor`) can be defined individually in
a `ThemeData`, but *swatches* can also be used. A *swatch* is basically a collection of color shades
generated (and for built in swatches, hardcoded) from a base color. A *swatch* is a *color palette*.

The [official documentation of the Material color system](https://material.io/design/color/the-color-system.html)
goes into further details about color palettes. Also, if we wanted to create our own Material color
palette, we could use the [color tool](https://material.io/resources/color/).

Apart from the main theme colors, we can even customize most of the Material widgets' colors
individually with a `ThemeData`, as well as global text and icon themes.

### Scaffold

`Scaffold` implements the basic layout structure of a Material Design page. Although it has many *
slots* that accept `Widget`s, there are some widgets that are designed to be used together
with `Scaffold` to easily create standard Material pages.

A `Scaffold` can manage the following Material components (the list is not exhaustive):

- [App bar](https://material.io/components/app-bars-top)
- [Floating action button](https://material.io/components/buttons-floating-action-button)
- [Navigation drawer](https://material.io/components/navigation-drawer)
- [Bottom navigation](https://material.io/components/bottom-navigation)

The middle area of a `Scaffold` is called the `body`. We can use the `body` of a `Scaffold` to
display the contents of a page and - not very surprisingly - we can use any `Widget` to do it.

// TODO image of the Scaffold slots and the layout

// TODO code sample

### AppBar

The `AppBar` widget implements a standard
Material [app bar](https://material.io/components/app-bars-top) (also known as a Toolbar, previously
known as an ActionBar).

We have full control over the content of an `AppBar`. Instead of a back navigation arrow or a
hamburger menu icon, we can use any `Widget` to define the leading content, and the title can also
be any `Widget`, not just `Text`.

While we're free to build any widget hierarchy for `AppBar`s slots, there are some widgets that play
nicely with `AppBar` by design:

- `Icon`
- `IconButton`
- `PopupMenuButton`

> We'll discuss widgets implementing more Material Design UI elements in Chapter 5.

## Cupertino app basics

Now, let's get familiar with the Cupertino "equivalents" of the previously mentioned Material
widgets.

### CupertinoApp

The `CupertinoApp` widget has the same responsibilities as its [Material counterpart](#materialapp).
One significant difference between the behaviors of `CupertinoApp` and `MaterialApp` surfaces when
we don't define the top level themes explicitly. `MaterialApp`'s theme defaults to the value
of `ThemeData.light()`, while `CupertinoApp` will use colors provided by iOS.

#### CupertinoThemeData

As
the [Human Interface Guidelines' Color](https://developer.apple.com/design/human-interface-guidelines/ios/visual-design/color/)
section suggests, `CupertinoThemeData` has much less flexibility compared to Material's `ThemeData`.
We can only define four colors, and the text theme.

### CupertinoPageScaffold and CupertinoTabScaffold

There are two kinds of scaffolds for the Cupertino framework:

- `CupertinoPageScaffold`,
- `CupertinoTabScaffold`

`CupertinoPageScaffold` has a navigation bar slot at the top of the page, and a body slot (
called `child`) for the page content.

`CupertinoTabScaffold` implements a typical iOS style page with support for bottom navigation tabs.

The navigation bar implementation is called `CupertinoNavigationBar`, and the bottom navigation tab
implementation is called `CupertinoTabBar`.

// TODO code samples

At this point, for the sake of the length of this chapter and the whole course, we'll part with
Cupertino for now. The Google codelab titled [*Building a Cupertino app with
Flutter*](https://codelabs.developers.google.com/codelabs/flutter-cupertino) gives a detailed
tutorial on how to build apps with Cupertino.

> TODO Building an app with both Material and Cupertino: why we shouldn't to that and what we can do
> to tackle this problem.

From now on, the code samples and examples we'll be discussing will assume a Material app
environment, as we can use the Material library on all supported platforms.

> While Material Design is, to an extent, a viable concept for iOS apps too, keep in mind that iOS
> users have their own design system they are familiar with.
> This means that an app designed strictly with Android and Material in mind may not be appealing or
> even acceptable for iOS users.
>
> In some cases a considerable approach is to let both Material and Cupertino go (or mix and match
> them cleverly) and implement the app's own design language that really works for most of the
> potential users.
>
> There are many existing apps that already managed to tackle this challenge. Such apps can easily
> be found at https://itsallwidgets.com/.

With that in mind, let's have a look at some of the most commonly used UI and layout widgets in
Flutter's arsenal.

## Common UI Widgets

In this section, we'll see a few basic UI widgets which are essential building blocks of a great
number of Flutter apps.

### Text

We've already seen the `Text` widget in action briefly in Chapter 2. Unsurprisingly, the `Text`
widget can render a piece of text on the screen.

The easiest way to use `Text` is by simply passing a `String` as its only positional required
parameter. In this case, the displayed text's properties are defined by the closest
enclosing `DefaultTextStyle`.

`Text` is actually highly customizable. We can define custom `TextStyle` objects - or use existing
ones from a `Theme` - to tell `Text` how we want it to render its content.

The following example shows some properties of `TextStyle` in action:

// TODO Put custom styled Text code here from 04_common_ui_widgets.dart with screenshot of the
result

### Icon

While most UI frameworks have only one basic component for displaying any kind of image, Flutter
differentiates between *images* and drawables that are meant to be used as *icons*.

Actually, the built-in icons themselves are provided as fonts (*MaterialIcons* and *CupertinoIcons*)
. Having `uses-material-design: true` and/or the `cupertino_icons` dependency in our project's *
pubspec.yaml* makes the mentioned fonts available to use.

We can use the `Icon` widget to display such icons. Working with the `Icon` widget is similar
to `Text`: the only positional required parameter is the icon to display (which can be `null`!). If
not specified, all other parameters default to the ambient `IconTheme` if available. If an
ambient `IconTheme` is not available, hardcoded default values apply.

> Taking `Icon`s `color` as an example, as stated in the official documentation:
>
> "Defaults to the current `IconTheme` color, if any.
>
> The given color will be adjusted by the opacity of the current `IconTheme`, if any.
>
> In material apps, if there is a `Theme` without any `IconTheme`s specified, icon colors default to
> white if the theme is dark and black if the theme is light.
>
> If no `IconTheme` and no `Theme` is specified, icons will default to black."

Icons passed to `Icon` are expected to be squared. Non-squared icons may render incorrectly.

The following example shows how to display the Android logo as an icon:

```dart
Icon(
  Icons.android,
  color: Colors.greenAccent,
  size: 40,
),
``` 

// TODO Screenshot of the rendered icon

### Image

Most apps have to display some images in one way or another. Images can come from our app's asset 
bundle, the device's local storage, from the network or from an in-memory bitmap.

We can use the `Image` widget to display images from each of the said sources.

We've already seen how to include images in an app's asset bundle in Chapter 2. // TODO link after main->this merge

Let's assume that there's a file named *logo_flutter.png* in our project's *assets/images* 
directory. To access the file as an image asset, we need to add either the file's, or the directory's
relative path to the project's *pubspec.yaml* file:

```yaml
flutter:
  ...
  assets:
    - assets/images/ # <- Here
```

We could use `Image`'s primary constructor to load *logo_flutter.png* by explicitly creating an  
`AssetImage`:

```dart
Image(
  image: AssetImage('assets/images/logo_flutter.png'),
),
```

Yet, there is a smarter, named constructor for loading images from assets, which attempts to load the 
pixel-density-aware asset, if available:

```dart
Image.asset(
  'assets/images/logo_flutter.png',
),
```

// TODO Screenshot of loaded Flutter logo

Loading images from the default asset bundle is straightforward. So is loading images from the file 
system of the device by using the `Image.file(File)` constructor.

On the other hand, a more interesting topic is loading images from the network (by URLs). For 
example, Android needs 3rd party libraries (Picasso, Glide, Coil) to make image loading as easy as 
possible, and so does iOS.

With Flutter, asynchronously loading an image from a URL is as simple as it can be (without 
any extra parameters of course):

```dart
Image.network(
  "https://picsum.photos/150",
),
```

> https://picsum.photos is the address of *Lorem Picsum*, a neat random placeholder image provider.
 
If our image provider backend needs extra headers (for example to authenticate the request), we can 
provide a `Map<String, String>` containing the required headers.

```dart
Image.network(
  "https://picsum.photos/150",
  headers: {
    "Authorization": "Bearer 0123456789"
  },
),
```
 
`Image` also supports displaying any widget we wish to as a loading indicator:

```dart
Image.network(
  "https://picsum.photos/150",
  loadingBuilder: (BuildContext context, Widget child,
      ImageChunkEvent? loadingProgress) {
    if (loadingProgress == null) return child;
    return Center(
      child: CircularProgressIndicator(
        value: loadingProgress.expectedTotalBytes != null
            ? loadingProgress.cumulativeBytesLoaded /
                loadingProgress.expectedTotalBytes!
            : null,
      ),
    );
  },
),
```

> Although the built-in `Image` widget can be really useful in simple situations, using the 
> [cached_network_image](https://pub.dev/packages/cached_network_image) package is highly 
> recommended, as it makes caching, and handling loading and error states even easier.  

### SizedBox

`SizedBox` is a widget with two main functionalities:

- If it has a child, `SizedBox` forces its child to have the same dimensions as itself 
  ([if the dimension values are permitted by its parent](https://flutter.dev/docs/development/ui/layout/constraints) - we'll explore this topic in Chapter 9 of this material).
    - This mode is useful for constraining the size of other widgets.
    
- If it doesn't have a child, `SizedBox`just takes up the space on the screen but doesn't render 
  anything.
    - This way, `SizedBox` can act as a spacer between other widgets.

## Layout Widgets

### Container

Margin, Border, Padding

Decorations

### Center

### Column

Vertical alignment of children

Main Axis, Cross Axis

### Row

Horizontal alignment of children

Main Axis, Cross Axis

mainAxisSize: MainAxisSize.min

### Expanded

Fit into a Column/Row, layout weight (flex factor)

### Stack

## Summary

## References, materials, further reading

- [Layouts in Flutter](https://flutter.dev/docs/development/ui/layout)
- [Understanding constraints](https://flutter.dev/docs/development/ui/layout/constraints)
- [Building a Cupertino app with Flutter (Codelab)](https://codelabs.developers.google.com/codelabs/flutter-cupertino)
- [It's All Widgets!](https://itsallwidgets.com/)
- [Assets and images - flutter.dev](https://flutter.dev/docs/development/ui/assets-and-images) 
- [Flutter Complete Reference - Alberto Miola](https://fluttercompletereference.com/)

