material/03.md, before:

# Essential Flutter Widgets

In the previous chapters we've gotten familiar with Dart and the basic structure of a starter Flutter project.

Now we'll take a look at some fundamental widgets that you'll encounter in most Flutter projects along with basic layouts and UI elements.

> To start each example from the [chapter's demo project](/projects/chapters/chapter_03), use the `flutter run -t lib/main.dart` command, changing `main.dart` to the file you want to be the entry point of the app.
> In Android Studio, you can create launch configs for each entry point file.

## The App Widgets

### MaterialApp

### CupertinoApp

## App pages

### Scaffold

### CupertinoPageScaffold

### CupertinoTabScaffold

### Appbar

### CupertinoNavigationBar

## Common UI Widgets

### Text

The easiest text rendering, text styling, custom style/theme

### Icon

Material, Cupertino icon pack, icon tinting, custom icons?

Only squared icons! Non-squared icons may render incorrectly.

### Image

Image.asset, how to declare assets, pubspec.yml, assets folder

Image.network, load images from URLs, headers, cache

loadingBuilder, errorBuilder, color

### SizedBox



## Layout Widgets

### Container

Margin, Border, Padding

Decorations

### Stack

### Center

### Column

Vertical alignment of children

Main Axis, Cross Axis

### Row

Horizontal alignment of children

Main Axis, Cross Axis

mainAxisSize: MainAxisSize.min

### Expanded

Fit into a Column/Row, layout weight (flex factor)

## Further reading, materials

- [Layouts in Flutter](https://flutter.dev/docs/development/ui/layout)
- [Understanding constraints](https://flutter.dev/docs/development/ui/layout/constraints)
- [Building a Cupertino app with Flutter (Codelab)](https://codelabs.developers.google.com/codelabs/flutter-cupertino)

Commit message:

Add the first iteration of The App Widgets section in Chapter 03's written material

material/03.md, after:

# Essential Flutter Widgets

In the previous chapters we've gotten familiar with Dart and the basic structure of a starter Flutter project.

Now we'll take a look at some fundamental widgets that you'll encounter in most Flutter projects along with basic layouts and UI elements.

> To start each example from the [chapter's demo project](/projects/chapters/chapter_03), use the `flutter run -t lib/main.dart` command, changing `main.dart` to the file you want to be the entry point of the app.
> In Android Studio, you can create launch configs for each entry point file.

## The App Widgets

While we definitely *could* build every aspect of a Flutter app ourselves from the ground up, it doesn't mean we really *should* go down on that path.

The [`WidgetsApp`](https://api.flutter.dev/flutter/widgets/WidgetsApp-class.html) widget is there to provide basic functionality for apps.

By making a `WidgetsApp` the top level widget in our app's widget tree, it makes implementing the following functionalities really straight-forward:

- Defining the default text style for every widget in the app
- Handling localization
- Navigation between pages (screens)
- Handling overlays, like dialogs that can be displayed over other content

`WidgetsApp` seems to be a class with a lot of responsibilities, but under the hood it delegates these responsibilities to other widgets, like [`DefaultTextStyle`](https://api.flutter.dev/flutter/widgets/DefaultTextStyle-class.html), or [`Navigator`](https://api.flutter.dev/flutter/widgets/Navigator-class.html).  

If our goal was to build a game, or a regular app with our own design language, `WidgetsApp` pretty much has us covered.

However, Flutter has built-in support for [Material Design](https://material.io/), Google's all-around design language, and even for Apple's [Human Interface Guidelines on iOS](https://developer.apple.com/design/human-interface-guidelines/ios/). Flutter's implementation of the latter is called Cupertino.

### MaterialApp


### CupertinoApp

## App pages

### Scaffold

### CupertinoPageScaffold

### CupertinoTabScaffold

### Appbar

### CupertinoNavigationBar

## Common UI Widgets

### Text

Text rendering, text styling, custom style/theme

### Icon

Material, Cupertino icon pack, icon tinting, custom icons?

Only squared icons! Non-squared icons may render incorrectly.

### Image

Image.asset, how to declare assets, pubspec.yml, assets folder

Image.network, load images from URLs, headers, cache

loadingBuilder, errorBuilder, color

### SizedBox



## Layout Widgets

### Container

Margin, Border, Padding

Decorations

### Stack

### Center

### Column

Vertical alignment of children

Main Axis, Cross Axis

### Row

Horizontal alignment of children

Main Axis, Cross Axis

mainAxisSize: MainAxisSize.min

### Expanded

Fit into a Column/Row, layout weight (flex factor)

## Further reading, materials

- [Layouts in Flutter](https://flutter.dev/docs/development/ui/layout)
- [Understanding constraints](https://flutter.dev/docs/development/ui/layout/constraints)
- [Building a Cupertino app with Flutter (Codelab)](https://codelabs.developers.google.com/codelabs/flutter-cupertino)
