material/04.md, before:

# Chapter 4: Accessibility and responsive UI support with Flutter

In the previous chapters, we've learned how we can create a simple Flutter application that can already run on multiple platforms, displaying hardcoded texts in a preferred language. We have one problem with the latter: 
With any luck, hundreds, thousands (or millions!) could use our apps after publishing them to the app stores. Apps supporting multiple languages and accessibility features can appeal to a broader audience worldwide.

#### Key abbreviations:
- `a11y`: accessibility
- `i18n`: internationalization
- `l10n`: localization

## Accessibility
In a nutshell, accessibility means that as many people can use our mobile app as possible, including those with disabilities, like visual or motor impairment.

### Internationalization and localization
If we want to deploy apps to users who speak another language, having apps support the target audience's native language and culture can be appealing. Internationalization means we should develop an app in a way that makes it possible to localize values like text and layouts for each language that the app supports.

#### Built-in solution
By default, Flutter only supports US English localization. To add support for other languages, the Flutter team recommends using a package called [flutter_localizations](https://api.flutter.dev/flutter/flutter_localizations/flutter_localizations-library.html).
To use flutter_localizations, we have to add it to our `pubspec.yaml` file:

```
dependencies:
  flutter:
    sdk: flutter
  flutter_localizations:
    sdk: flutter 
```

After a successfully completed `pub get packages` command, we have to specify additional list type properties for `MaterialApp` in the `app.dart` file:

- `localizationsDelegates[]`,
- `supportedLocales[]`.

Next, we have to add predefined global values (`GlobalMaterialLocalizations.delegate`, `const Locale(’hu’)`) to make the application's widgets adapt to the current language.

After the `flutter_localizations` package was added we add the [intl](https://pub.dev/packages/intl) package, which provides internationalization and localization facilities, including message translation, plurals and genders, date/number formatting and parsing, and bidirectional text. We will use this package as a library with adding it to the app’s `pubspec.yaml` file:
```
dependencies:
  intl: ^0.17.0
```
Additionally in `pubspec.yaml` file, we should enable the generate flag like the following code section:
```
flutter:  
	generate: true
```
It is essential to generate localizations. To configure where these generated files should be placed, we can add a new `l10n.yaml` file to the root directory of the Flutter project with the following content:

```
arb-dir: lib/l10n  
template-arb-file: app_en.arb  
output-localization-file: l10n.dart  
output-class: L10n
```
With this file we specified the following settings:
-   The input files (`app_en.arb` and `app_hu.arb`) are located in `${FLUTTER_PROJECT}/lib/l10n`,
-   Our `app_en.arb` input file provides the template,
-   The generated localizations are placed in the `l10n.dart` file

In the generated `l10n.dart` file, the class name is `L10n`.

In the `app_en.arb` (*ARB* format  = *Application Resource Bundle*) template file we add our default English localization. For example, to store the title localization of our home screen we added the following key values:
```
{  
	"homeTitle": "Know your Santa",  
	"@homeTitle": {  
		"description": "Page title.",  
		"context": "HomePage"  
	}  
}
```

The `homeTitle` is the *resource ID* and its value is the localization string (“*Know your Santa*”).
Because `app_en.arb` file is the template file, we have to add an attribute item keyed by the original resource id plus a prefix ‘`@`’ character. In the attribute item **optional** we can use predefined resource attributes like:
-   **`description`**: A short paragraph describing the resource and how it is being used by the app, and messages that need to be passed to the localization process and translators. Every attribute item must have a `description` as a requirement.
- **`context`**: It describes the context in which this resource applies. When this piece of information is missing, it defaults to global `context`.

In the same directory in the `app_hu.arb` file for Hungarian translation of the same string:
```
{  
	"homeTitle": "Ismerd meg a Mikulásod"  
}
```

The complete `app_en.arb` file is as follows:
```
{
  "@@locale": "en",
  "homeTitle": "Know your Santa",
  "@homeTitle": {
    "description": "Page title.",
    "context": "HomePage"
  },
  "homeAppbarTitle": "HomePage",
  "@homeAppbarTitle": {
    "description": "Page title of appbar.",
    "context": "HomePage"
  },
  "homeCurrentLanguage": "Current language: {language}",
  "@homeCurrentLanguage": {
    "description": "Show the current language on the Home page",
    "context": "HomePage",
    "placeholders": {
      "language": {}
    }
  },
  "homeYourSanta": "Your santa",
  "@homeYourSanta": {
    "description": ""
  },
  "santaName": "Santa Claus",
  "@santaName": {
    "description": ""
  },
  "santaHat": "Hat",
  "@santaOutfit1": {
    "description": ""
  },
  "santaTie": "Tie",
  "@santaOutfit2": {
    "description": ""
  },
  "santaDescription": "Jingle bells jingle bells\nJingle all the way\nOh what fun it is to ride\nIn a one horse open sleigh\nJingle bells jingle bells\nJingle all the way\nOh what fun it is to ride\nIn a one horse open sleigh\n\nDashing through the snow\nIn a one horse open sleigh\nOver the fields we go\nLaughing all the way\nBells on bob tail ring\nMaking spirits bright\nOh What fun it is to ride \nA sleighing song tonight\n\nOh, oh jingle bells jingle bells\nJingle all the way\nOh what fun it is to ride\nIn a one horse open sleigh\n\nYou better not pout\nYou better not cry\nYou better not shout\nI'm telling you why\nSanta Claus is coming to town\n\nHe's making a list\nHe's checking it twice\nGonna find out\nWho's naughty or nice\nSanta Claus is coming to town\n\nHe sees you when you're sleeping\nHe knows if you're awake\nHe knows if you've been bad or good\nSo be good for goodness sake\n\nI am dreaming of a white Christmas\nJust like the ones I used to know\nWhere the tree tops glisten\nAnd children listen\nTo hear sleighbells in the snow\nI am dreaming of a white Christmas\nWith every Christmas card I write\nMay your days be merry and bright\nAnd may all your Christmases be\n\nOh, the weather outside is frightful\nBut the fire is so delightful\nAnd since we've got no place to go\nLet it snow, let it snow, let it snow\n\nOh, it doesn't show signs of stopping\nAnd I've brought some corn for popping\nThe lights are turned way down low\nLet it snow, let it snow, let it snow\n\nWhen we finally kiss goodnight\nHow I'll hate going out in the storm\nBut, if you really hold me tight\nAll the way home I'll be warm\n\nThe fire is slowly dying\nAnd my dear, we're still good by ing\nBut, as long as you love me so\nLet it snow, let it snow, let it snow\n\nHere comes Santa Claus\nHere comes Santa Claus\nRight down Santa Claus Lane\nVixen and Blitzen and all his reindeer\nPullin' on the reins\nBells are ringin', children singin'\nAll is merry and bright\nHang your stockings and say your prayers\nSanta Claus comes tonight\n\nHere comes Santa Claus\nHere comes Santa Claus\nRight down Santa Claus Lane\nHe's got a bag that's filled with toys\nFor boys and girls again\nHear those sleigh bells jingle jangle\nOh what a beautiful sight\nJump in bed, and cover your head\nSanta Claus comes tonight\nSanta Claus comes tonight",
  "@santaDescription": {
    "description": ""
  }
}
```


And the `app_hu.arb` file is as follows:
```
{
  "@@locale": "hu",
  "homeTitle": "Ismerd meg a Mikulásod",
  "homeAppbarTitle": "Kezdőlap",
  "homeCurrentLanguage": "Aktuális nyelv: {language}",
  "homeYourSanta": "A mikulásod",
  "santaName": "Mikulás",
  "santaHat": "Kalap",
  "santaTie": "Nyaktekerészeti mellfekvenc",
  "santaDescription": "Hull a pelyhes fehér hó,\njöjj el kedves télapó.\nMinden gyermek várva vár,\nvidám ének hangja száll.\nVan zsákodban minden jó,\npiros alma, mogyoró.\nJöjj el hozzánk, várunk rád,\nkedves öreg télapó!\n\nNagyszakállú télapó,\njó gyermek barátja.\nCukrot, diót, mogyorót\nrejteget a zsákja.\nAmerre jár reggelig,\nkis cipőcske megtelik.\nMegtölti a télapó,\nha üresen látja."
}
```

Whenever we run the application the codegen takes place and in `${FLUTTER_PROJECT}/.dart_tool/flutter_gen/gen_l10n` we see generated files:

-   `l10n.dart`, 
-   `l10n_en.dart`,
-   `l10n_hu.dart`.
      
In the `main.dart` file our `MaterialApp` needed to include `L10n.delegate()` in their app’s `localisationDelegates` list, and the locales we support in the app’s `supportedLocales` list like the following snippet:

``` dart
import 'gen_l10n/l10n.dart';

return MaterialApp(  
	localizationsDelegates: L10n.localizationsDelegates,  
	supportedLocales: L10n.supportedLocales,  
	home: HomePage(),  
);
```

Callers can lookup localized strings with an instance of `L10n` returned by `L10n.of(context)`. For instance, in the `home_page.dart` file in the top of `build()` method of `HomePage` `Widget` we can get the `L10n` object and pass its `homeTitle` to the title text:

``` dart
import 'package:flutter_gen/gen_l10n/l10n.dart';

class  HomePage  extends  StatelessWidget {  

	@override  
	Widget build(BuildContext context) {  
		final L10n l10n = L10n.of(context);  
		  
		return Scaffold(  
			body:  
				//...   
				Text(l10n.homeTitle),   
				//...  
			);  
	}  
}
```

As a result, the user can see the home page according to the system set language of its device:
<img src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/15221068/117216778-8e908100-ae00-11eb-9ecf-7b75e7fbaeaf.png" width="375" height="812">
<img src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/15221068/117217332-87b63e00-ae01-11eb-9ef5-fac34c7a3648.png" width="375" height="812">



### RTL support
In some languages, for instance, in Arabic writing goes from the right to the left (RTL) instead of from the left to the right like in English or Hungarian. Localization for RTL languages needs only the text direction changing.
To demonstrate RTL support we add `.arb` file including Arabic string resources and we use `start`, `end` properties of `EdgeInsetsDirectional` class instead of the basic `left` and `right` of `EdgeInsets` insets class.

### Text-to-Speech 
People with visual disabilities use the default [TalkBack](https://support.google.com/accessibility/android/answer/6283677?hl=en) or [VoiceOver](https://www.apple.com/lae/accessibility/vision/) assistant software to read the content of screens.
If we want to customize it, we can do using the [Semantics](https://api.flutter.dev/flutter/widgets/Semantics-class.html) widget which has tons of properties. It can be used for analytics too. 

For example, we can wrap one of our `Text` Widgets into a `Semantics` Widget and we can add a `label` property.
``` dart
 title: Semantics(
          child: Text(l10n.homeAppbarTitle),
          label: "This is the HomePage.",
        ),
```

## Responsive UI
Once we need to support multiple platforms with different sizes and factors, we'll need to learn about responsive layouts and how to deal with them in Flutter.
### SizedBox vs. FittedBox
We've learned that we can use the `SizedBox` widget for presenting any space between widgets and it’s simpler than a `Container` widget when we don’t need to specify borders and more properties. To achieve better scalability, we can consider using the [FittedBox](https://api.flutter.dev/flutter/widgets/FittedBox-class.html) widget. By using `FittedBox`, we can easily automatically scale up/down and position its child within itself according to `fit` property, which is come from the `BoxFit` class. It’s easy to use while being powerful.
### Wrap
The [Wrap](https://api.flutter.dev/flutter/widgets/Wrap-class.html) widget is another very useful tool to handle different scaling issues. This `Wrap` widget shows its children in multiple horizontal or vertical runs. When there is not enough space to fit one of its children, `Wrap` creates a new run adjacent in the cross axis.
### Layoutbuilder vs. MediaQuery
[MediaQuery](https://api.flutter.dev/flutter/widgets/MediaQuery-class.html) always provides the size of the full application, info about the physical screen etc,  while [Layoutbuilder](https://api.flutter.dev/flutter/widgets/LayoutBuilder-class.html) takes only the current parent size.

In this chapter, we will see how the [flutter_screenutil](https://pub.dev/packages/flutter_screenutil) package wraps the MediaQuery into a size config under the hood.
First of all, we need to initialize and set the fit size in the `app.dart` file before we show any size related UI like this:
``` dart
import 'package:flutter_screenutil/flutter_screenutil.dart';

class App extends StatelessWidget {
  @override
  Widget build(BuildContext context) {
    //Set the fit size (fill in the screen size of the device in the design,in dp)
    return ScreenUtilInit(
      designSize: const Size(375, 812),
      allowFontScaling: false,
      builder: () => MaterialApp(
        ...
      ),
    );
  }
}
```
> Note that the `designSize` property should equal the size of the design draft. Hopefully, our development is based on a design.

Under the hood, `MediaQuery` provides important properties like:
- `pixelRatio` (device pixel density),
- screen `width`,
- screen `height`,
- `viewInsets` and `viewPadding` (these properties could be useful when we want to handle some padding issues caused by software keyboard),
- size of `appBar`, and `notch` - if the device has one.

> The `MediaQuery` widget also provides information about the current orientation. With that, we could easily handle the landscape mode too if we don’t want to disable it. We could enable and disable the different orientations in the `main.dart` file if we add or remove one of them from the `setPreferredOrientations` list of `SystemChrome` class before we run our application.

After we successfully initiated the `ScreenUtil` we could use the `setHeight()` and `setWidth()` functions to adapt screen height/width.

Besides, we could use `.w()`, `.h()` and `.r()` extension functions to make our code more readable.

### 🚨 Don’t forget that we can only achieve responsiveness if we use the above-mentioned extension functions for all size properties (including font sizes) on each widget for each screen. If we follow this rule, we should not be surprised at even a small screen.


## Further reading, materials

- [Internationalizing Flutter apps](https://flutter.dev/docs/development/accessibility-and-localization/internationalization)

- [Creating responsive apps](https://flutter.dev/docs/development/ui/layout/responsive)
- [Developing for Multiple Screen Sizes and Orientations in Flutter](https://medium.com/flutter-community/developing-for-multiple-screen-sizes-and-orientations-in-flutter-fragments-in-flutter-a4c51b849434) by Deven Joshi
- [Build Responsive UIs in Flutter](https://medium.com/flutter-community/build-responsive-uis-in-flutter-fd450bd59158) by Raouf Rahiche
- [How to build a responsive layout in Flutter](https://blog.codemagic.io/building-responsive-applications-with-flutter/o) by Souvik Biswas (codemagic)
- [responsive_builder](https://pub.dev/packages/responsive_builder) - Another interesting package
- Used icon by [Icons8](https://icons8.com/vector-creator/illustration/60799f58487a400015ee9ac9)

Commit message:

Update the chapter 4README.md with the newer chapters order.
Signed-off-by: Csongor Vogel <gerfalcon.vogel@gmail.com>

material/04.md, after:

# Chapter 4: Accessibility and responsive UI support with Flutter

In the previous chapters, we've learned how we can create a simple Flutter application that can already run on multiple platforms, displaying hardcoded texts in a preferred language. We have one problem with the latter: 
With any luck, hundreds, thousands (or millions!) could use our apps after publishing them to the app stores. Apps supporting multiple languages and accessibility features can appeal to a broader audience worldwide.

#### Key abbreviations:
- `a11y`: accessibility
- `i18n`: internationalization
- `l10n`: localization

## Accessibility
In a nutshell, accessibility means that as many people can use our mobile app as possible, including those with disabilities, like visual or motor impairment.

### Internationalization and localization
If we want to deploy apps to users who speak a different language than our default one, having apps support the target audience's native language and culture can be appealing in those markets. Internationalization means we should develop an app in a way that makes it possible to localize values like text and layouts for each language the app supports.
#### Built-in solution
By default, Flutter only supports US English localization. To add support for other languages, the Flutter team recommends using a package called [flutter_localizations](https://api.flutter.dev/flutter/flutter_localizations/flutter_localizations-library.html).
To use flutter_localizations, we have to add it to our `pubspec.yaml` file:

```
dependencies:
  flutter:
    sdk: flutter
  flutter_localizations:
    sdk: flutter 
```

After a successfully completed `pub get packages` command, we have to specify additional list type properties for `MaterialApp`:
- `localizationsDelegates[]`,
- `supportedLocales[]`.

Next, we have to add predefined global values (`GlobalMaterialLocalizations.delegate`, `const Locale(’hu’)`) to make the application's widgets adapt to the current language.

Besides the  `flutter_localizations` package, we can add the [intl](https://pub.dev/packages/intl) package too, which provides internationalization and localization facilities, including message translation, plurals and genders, date/number formatting and parsing, and bidirectional text support. Let's include this package too in the project's `pubspec.yaml` file:
```
dependencies:
  intl: ^0.17.0
```
Additionally in `pubspec.yaml` file, we should enable the generate flag like the following code section:
```
flutter:  
	generate: true
```
It is essential to generate localizations. To configure where these generated files should be placed, we can add a new `l10n.yaml` file to the root directory of the Flutter project with the following content:

```
arb-dir: lib/l10n  
template-arb-file: app_en.arb  
output-localization-file: l10n.dart  
output-class: L10n
```
With this file we specified the following settings:
-   The input files (`app_en.arb` and `app_hu.arb`) are located in `${FLUTTER_PROJECT}/lib/l10n`,
-   Our `app_en.arb` input file provides the template,
-   The generated localizations are placed in the `l10n.dart` file

In the generated `l10n.dart` file, the class name is `L10n`.

In the `app_en.arb` (*ARB* format  = *Application Resource Bundle*) template file we add our default English localization. For example, to store the title localization of our home screen we added the following key values:
```
{  
	"homeTitle": "Know your Santa",  
	"@homeTitle": {  
		"description": "Page title.",  
		"context": "HomePage"  
	}  
}
```

The `homeTitle` is the *resource ID* and its value is the localization string (“*Know your Santa*”).
Because `app_en.arb` file is the template file, we have to add an attribute item keyed by the original resource id plus a prefix ‘`@`’ character. In the attribute item **optional** we can use predefined resource attributes like:
-   **`description`**: A short paragraph describing the resource and how it is being used by the app, and messages that need to be passed to the localization process and translators. Every attribute item must have a `description` as a requirement.
- **`context`**: It describes the context in which this resource applies. When this piece of information is missing, it defaults to global `context`.

In the same directory in the `app_hu.arb` file for Hungarian translation of the same string:
```
{  
	"homeTitle": "Ismerd meg a Mikulásod"  
}
```

The complete `app_en.arb` file is as follows:
```
{
  "@@locale": "en",
  "homeTitle": "Know your Santa",
  "@homeTitle": {
    "description": "Page title.",
    "context": "HomePage"
  },
  "homeAppbarTitle": "HomePage",
  "@homeAppbarTitle": {
    "description": "Page title of appbar.",
    "context": "HomePage"
  },
  "homeCurrentLanguage": "Current language: {language}",
  "@homeCurrentLanguage": {
    "description": "Show the current language on the Home page",
    "context": "HomePage",
    "placeholders": {
      "language": {}
    }
  },
  "homeYourSanta": "Your santa",
  "@homeYourSanta": {
    "description": ""
  },
  "santaName": "Santa Claus",
  "@santaName": {
    "description": ""
  },
  "santaHat": "Hat",
  "@santaOutfit1": {
    "description": ""
  },
  "santaTie": "Tie",
  "@santaOutfit2": {
    "description": ""
  },
  "santaDescription": "Jingle bells jingle bells\nJingle all the way\nOh what fun it is to ride\nIn a one horse open sleigh\nJingle bells jingle bells\nJingle all the way\nOh what fun it is to ride\nIn a one horse open sleigh\n\nDashing through the snow\nIn a one horse open sleigh\nOver the fields we go\nLaughing all the way\nBells on bob tail ring\nMaking spirits bright\nOh What fun it is to ride \nA sleighing song tonight\n\nOh, oh jingle bells jingle bells\nJingle all the way\nOh what fun it is to ride\nIn a one horse open sleigh\n\nYou better not pout\nYou better not cry\nYou better not shout\nI'm telling you why\nSanta Claus is coming to town\n\nHe's making a list\nHe's checking it twice\nGonna find out\nWho's naughty or nice\nSanta Claus is coming to town\n\nHe sees you when you're sleeping\nHe knows if you're awake\nHe knows if you've been bad or good\nSo be good for goodness sake\n\nI am dreaming of a white Christmas\nJust like the ones I used to know\nWhere the tree tops glisten\nAnd children listen\nTo hear sleighbells in the snow\nI am dreaming of a white Christmas\nWith every Christmas card I write\nMay your days be merry and bright\nAnd may all your Christmases be\n\nOh, the weather outside is frightful\nBut the fire is so delightful\nAnd since we've got no place to go\nLet it snow, let it snow, let it snow\n\nOh, it doesn't show signs of stopping\nAnd I've brought some corn for popping\nThe lights are turned way down low\nLet it snow, let it snow, let it snow\n\nWhen we finally kiss goodnight\nHow I'll hate going out in the storm\nBut, if you really hold me tight\nAll the way home I'll be warm\n\nThe fire is slowly dying\nAnd my dear, we're still good by ing\nBut, as long as you love me so\nLet it snow, let it snow, let it snow\n\nHere comes Santa Claus\nHere comes Santa Claus\nRight down Santa Claus Lane\nVixen and Blitzen and all his reindeer\nPullin' on the reins\nBells are ringin', children singin'\nAll is merry and bright\nHang your stockings and say your prayers\nSanta Claus comes tonight\n\nHere comes Santa Claus\nHere comes Santa Claus\nRight down Santa Claus Lane\nHe's got a bag that's filled with toys\nFor boys and girls again\nHear those sleigh bells jingle jangle\nOh what a beautiful sight\nJump in bed, and cover your head\nSanta Claus comes tonight\nSanta Claus comes tonight",
  "@santaDescription": {
    "description": ""
  }
}
```


And the `app_hu.arb` file is as follows:
```
{
  "@@locale": "hu",
  "homeTitle": "Ismerd meg a Mikulásod",
  "homeAppbarTitle": "Kezdőlap",
  "homeCurrentLanguage": "Aktuális nyelv: {language}",
  "homeYourSanta": "A mikulásod",
  "santaName": "Mikulás",
  "santaHat": "Kalap",
  "santaTie": "Nyaktekerészeti mellfekvenc",
  "santaDescription": "Hull a pelyhes fehér hó,\njöjj el kedves télapó.\nMinden gyermek várva vár,\nvidám ének hangja száll.\nVan zsákodban minden jó,\npiros alma, mogyoró.\nJöjj el hozzánk, várunk rád,\nkedves öreg télapó!\n\nNagyszakállú télapó,\njó gyermek barátja.\nCukrot, diót, mogyorót\nrejteget a zsákja.\nAmerre jár reggelig,\nkis cipőcske megtelik.\nMegtölti a télapó,\nha üresen látja."
}
```

Whenever we run the application the codegen takes place and in `${FLUTTER_PROJECT}/.dart_tool/flutter_gen/gen_l10n` we see generated files:

-   `l10n.dart`, 
-   `l10n_en.dart`,
-   `l10n_hu.dart`.
      
In the `main.dart` file our `MaterialApp` needed to include `L10n.delegate()` in their app’s `localisationDelegates` list, and the locales we support in the app’s `supportedLocales` list like the following snippet:

``` dart
import 'gen_l10n/l10n.dart';

return MaterialApp(  
	localizationsDelegates: L10n.localizationsDelegates,  
	supportedLocales: L10n.supportedLocales,  
	home: HomePage(),  
);
```

Callers can lookup localized strings with an instance of `L10n` returned by `L10n.of(context)`. For instance, in the `home_page.dart` file in the top of `build()` method of `HomePage` `Widget` we can get the `L10n` object and pass its `homeTitle` to the title text:

``` dart
import 'package:flutter_gen/gen_l10n/l10n.dart';

class  HomePage  extends  StatelessWidget {  

	@override  
	Widget build(BuildContext context) {  
		final L10n l10n = L10n.of(context);  
		  
		return Scaffold(  
			body:  
				//...   
				Text(l10n.homeTitle),   
				//...  
			);  
	}  
}
```

As a result, the user can see the home page according to the system set language of its device:
<img src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/15221068/117216778-8e908100-ae00-11eb-9ecf-7b75e7fbaeaf.png" width="375" height="812">
<img src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/15221068/117217332-87b63e00-ae01-11eb-9ef5-fac34c7a3648.png" width="375" height="812">



### RTL support
In some languages, for instance, in Arabic writing goes from the right to the left (RTL) instead of from the left to the right like in English or Hungarian. Localization for RTL languages needs only the text direction changing.
To demonstrate RTL support we add `.arb` file including Arabic string resources and we use `start`, `end` properties of `EdgeInsetsDirectional` class instead of the basic `left` and `right` of `EdgeInsets` insets class.

### Text-to-Speech 
People with visual disabilities use the default [TalkBack](https://support.google.com/accessibility/android/answer/6283677?hl=en) or [VoiceOver](https://www.apple.com/lae/accessibility/vision/) assistant software to read the content of screens.
If we want to customize it, we can do using the [Semantics](https://api.flutter.dev/flutter/widgets/Semantics-class.html) widget which has tons of properties. It can be used for analytics too. 

For example, we can wrap one of our `Text` Widgets into a `Semantics` Widget and we can add a `label` property.
``` dart
 title: Semantics(
          child: Text(l10n.homeAppbarTitle),
          label: "This is the HomePage.",
        ),
```

## Responsive UI
Once we need to support multiple platforms with different sizes and factors, we'll need to learn about responsive layouts and how to deal with them in Flutter.
### SizedBox vs. FittedBox
We've learned that we can use the `SizedBox` widget for presenting any space between widgets and it’s simpler than a `Container` widget when we don’t need to specify borders and more properties. To achieve better scalability, we can consider using the [FittedBox](https://api.flutter.dev/flutter/widgets/FittedBox-class.html) widget. By using `FittedBox`, we can easily automatically scale up/down and position its child within itself according to `fit` property, which is come from the `BoxFit` class. It’s easy to use while being powerful.
### Wrap
The [Wrap](https://api.flutter.dev/flutter/widgets/Wrap-class.html) widget is another very useful tool to handle different scaling issues. This `Wrap` widget shows its children in multiple horizontal or vertical runs. When there is not enough space to fit one of its children, `Wrap` creates a new run adjacent in the cross axis.
### Layoutbuilder vs. MediaQuery
[MediaQuery](https://api.flutter.dev/flutter/widgets/MediaQuery-class.html) always provides the size of the full application, info about the physical screen etc,  while [Layoutbuilder](https://api.flutter.dev/flutter/widgets/LayoutBuilder-class.html) takes only the current parent size.

In this chapter, we will see how the [flutter_screenutil](https://pub.dev/packages/flutter_screenutil) package wraps the MediaQuery into a size config under the hood.
First of all, we need to initialize and set the fit size in the `app.dart` file before we show any size related UI like this:
``` dart
import 'package:flutter_screenutil/flutter_screenutil.dart';

class App extends StatelessWidget {
  @override
  Widget build(BuildContext context) {
    //Set the fit size (fill in the screen size of the device in the design,in dp)
    return ScreenUtilInit(
      designSize: const Size(375, 812),
      allowFontScaling: false,
      builder: () => MaterialApp(
        ...
      ),
    );
  }
}
```
> Note that the `designSize` property should equal the size of the design draft. Hopefully, our development is based on a design.

Under the hood, `MediaQuery` provides important properties like:
- `pixelRatio` (device pixel density),
- screen `width`,
- screen `height`,
- `viewInsets` and `viewPadding` (these properties could be useful when we want to handle some padding issues caused by software keyboard),
- size of `appBar`, and `notch` - if the device has one.

> The `MediaQuery` widget also provides information about the current orientation. With that, we could easily handle the landscape mode too if we don’t want to disable it. We could enable and disable the different orientations in the `main.dart` file if we add or remove one of them from the `setPreferredOrientations` list of `SystemChrome` class before we run our application.

After we successfully initiated the `ScreenUtil` we could use the `setHeight()` and `setWidth()` functions to adapt screen height/width.

Besides, we could use `.w()`, `.h()` and `.r()` extension functions to make our code more readable.

### 🚨 Don’t forget that we can only achieve responsiveness if we use the above-mentioned extension functions for all size properties (including font sizes) on each widget for each screen. If we follow this rule, we should not be surprised at even a small screen.


## Further reading, materials

- [Internationalizing Flutter apps](https://flutter.dev/docs/development/accessibility-and-localization/internationalization)

- [Creating responsive apps](https://flutter.dev/docs/development/ui/layout/responsive)
- [Developing for Multiple Screen Sizes and Orientations in Flutter](https://medium.com/flutter-community/developing-for-multiple-screen-sizes-and-orientations-in-flutter-fragments-in-flutter-a4c51b849434) by Deven Joshi
- [Build Responsive UIs in Flutter](https://medium.com/flutter-community/build-responsive-uis-in-flutter-fd450bd59158) by Raouf Rahiche
- [How to build a responsive layout in Flutter](https://blog.codemagic.io/building-responsive-applications-with-flutter/o) by Souvik Biswas (codemagic)
- [responsive_builder](https://pub.dev/packages/responsive_builder) - Another interesting package
- Used icon by [Icons8](https://icons8.com/vector-creator/illustration/60799f58487a400015ee9ac9)
