material/08.md, before:

# Chapter 8: Backend as a Service (BaaS), Firebase, FlutterFire

## What's BaaS?

Backend-as-a-Service (BaaS) is a cloud service model where all of the web and/or mobile apps' backed services are outsourced to a service provider. BaaS providers deliver and maintain all APIs needed to use their services.

## What's Firebase?

Firebase is Google's BaaS platform. It provides many pre-built services, including:

- Authentication
- File storage (Storage)
- Database (Firestore, Realtime Database)
    - NoSQL, collection and document based
- Crash reporting (Crashlytics)
- Analytics
- etc.

## Project setup

https://firebase.flutter.dev/docs/overview/

No FlutterFire love for Windows and Linux yet. Desktop = macOS.

https://firebase.google.com/

Show around the Firebase Console.

Create a new app.

Show menu.

Enable:

- Authentication
- Firestore
- Storage
- Crashlytics
- Analytics

### Embedder project setup

#### Android

https://firebase.flutter.dev/docs/installation/android

Firebase app reg, google-services.json

android/build.gradle

android/app/build.gradle

MULTIDEX!!! API21+

#### iOS

https://firebase.flutter.dev/docs/installation/ios

Firebase app reg, GoogleService-Info.plist

Needs XCode to be able to add it to the project.
https://firebase.flutter.dev/docs/installation/ios#installing-your-firebase-configuration-file

#### Web

https://firebase.flutter.dev/docs/installation/web

Displaying images on the web, CORS

https://flutter.dev/docs/development/platform-integration/web-images

## FlutterFire

(Rt Database has no Web support, but use Firestore instead!)
Crashlytics has no Web support :(


### Firestore

https://firebase.flutter.dev/docs/firestore/usage/

dispose - we're using StreamBuilders, so there's no need to manually dispose the subscriptions

### Analytics

Scarce documentation
https://pub.dev/packages/firebase_analytics

https://firebase.google.com/docs/analytics/debugview#android

adb shell setprop log.tag.FA VERBOSE
adb shell setprop log.tag.FA-SVC VERBOSE
adb logcat -v time -s FA FA-SVC

adb shell setprop debug.firebase.analytics.app <package_name>
adb shell setprop debug.firebase.analytics.app .none.

Commit message:

Update chapter 8 material and project

material/08.md, after:

# Chapter 8: Backend as a Service (BaaS), Firebase, FlutterFire

In this chapter, we'll get familiar with the term *BaaS*, the services of Firebase, and Firebase's libraries that we can use to integrate some of those services into our Flutter apps. We'll then see some of the Firebase services in action in a real-time updating forum application.

## What's BaaS?

Backend-as-a-Service (BaaS) is a cloud service model where all of an apps' back-end services are outsourced to a service provider. BaaS providers deliver and maintain all APIs and libraries needed to use their services.

## What's Firebase?

Firebase is Google's BaaS platform. It provides many pre-built services, including:

- Authentication
- File storage (Storage)
- Database (Firestore, Realtime Database)
  - NoSQL, collection and document based database
- Crash reporting (Crashlytics)
- Analytics
- etc.

## Getting started with Firebase

To use Firebase services, all we need to have is a Google account. If we visit https://firebase.google.com in a browser after signing in with a Google account, we can access our Firebase console right away.

![08_firebase_console_button.png](images/08_firebase_console_button.png)

## Project setup

https://firebase.flutter.dev/docs/overview/

No FlutterFire love for Windows and Linux yet, so the desktop support is for macOS only at the writing of this material.

https://firebase.google.com/

Show around the Firebase Console.

Create a new app.

Show menu.

Enable:

- Authentication
- Firestore
- Storage
- Crashlytics
- Analytics

### Embedder project setup

#### Android

https://firebase.flutter.dev/docs/installation/android

Firebase app reg, google-services.json

android/build.gradle

android/app/build.gradle

MULTIDEX!!! API21+

#### iOS

https://firebase.flutter.dev/docs/installation/ios

Firebase app reg, GoogleService-Info.plist

Needs XCode to be able to add it to the project.
https://firebase.flutter.dev/docs/installation/ios#installing-your-firebase-configuration-file

#### Web

https://firebase.flutter.dev/docs/installation/web

Displaying images on the web, CORS

https://flutter.dev/docs/development/platform-integration/web-images

## FlutterFire

(Rt Database has no Web support, but use Firestore instead!)
Crashlytics has no Web support :(

### Authentication

We have to enable it on the console. For the sake of simplicity, we'll use the email/password login method.

### Firestore

https://firebase.flutter.dev/docs/firestore/usage/

dispose - we're using StreamBuilders, so there's no need to manually dispose the subscriptions

### Storage

File storage, the folder structure is flexible.

Easy to upload and download/reference files.

### Crashlytics

Crash reporting.


### Analytics

Scarce documentation
https://pub.dev/packages/firebase_analytics

https://firebase.google.com/docs/analytics/debugview#android

adb shell setprop log.tag.FA VERBOSE
adb shell setprop log.tag.FA-SVC VERBOSE
adb logcat -v time -s FA FA-SVC

adb shell setprop debug.firebase.analytics.app <package_name>
adb shell setprop debug.firebase.analytics.app .none.
