material/09.md, before:


# Accessibility and responsive UI support on Flutter

In the previous chapters we've learnt how should we implement a Flutter application for ourself, for our devices in our prefered language. We have only one problem with that: 
Luckily not only we will use it. Others will use it as well if we support a11y. 

#### Key abbreviations:
- `a11y`: accessibility
- `i18n`: internationalization
- `l10n`: localization

## Accessibility
  In nutshell, accessibility means that our mobile app is used by as many people as possible. Including we have to make our application accessible to those with disabilities.
 
### Internationalization and localization
If the app might be deployed to users who speak another language then we have to internationalise it. That means we should develop the app in a way that makes it possible to localise values like text and layouts for each language that the app supports.

#### Built-in solution
By default, Flutter only supports US English localizations. To add support for Hungarian language, we can add a package called [flutter_localizations](https://api.flutter.dev/flutter/flutter_localizations/flutter_localizations-library.html) which is the recommended package by the Flutter Team.
To use flutter_localizations, we haveto add it to our `pubspec.yaml` file:

```
dependencies:
  flutter:
    sdk: flutter
  flutter_localizations:
    sdk: flutter 
```

After a successfully completed `pub get packages` command in the `app.dart` file we have to specify additional MaterialApp list type properties like:

- `localizationsDelegates[]`,
- `supportedLocales[]`.

First, we add predefined global values ( `GlobalMaterialLocalizations.delegate`,  `const Locale(’hu’)` ) to make the widgets of the application to be adapted.

After the `flutter_localizations` package was added we add the [intl](https://pub.dev/packages/intl) package, which provides internationalization and localization facilities, including message translation, plurals and genders, date/number formatting and parsing, and bidirectional text. We will use this package as a library with adding it to app’s `pubspec.yaml` file:
```
dependencies:
  intl: ^0.17.0
```
Additionally in `pubspec.yaml` file we should enable the generate flag like the following code section:
```
flutter:  
	generate: true
```
It is essential to generate localizations. For configure where should be placed these generated files, we can add a new `l10n.yaml` file to the root directory of the Flutter project with the following content:

```
arb-dir: lib/l10n  
template-arb-file: app_en.arb  
output-localization-file: l10n.dart  
output-class: L10n
```
With this file we specified the following settings:
-   The input files (`app_en.arb` and `app_hu.arb`) are located in `${FLUTTER_PROJECT}/lib/l10n`,
-   Our `app_en.arb` input file provides the template,
-   The generated localizations are placed in the `l10n.dart` file

In the generated `l10n.dart` file the class name is `L10n`.

In the `app_en.arb` (*ARB* format  = *Application Resource Bundle*) template file we add our default english localization. For example to store the title localization of our home screen we added the following key-values:
```
{  
	"homeTitle": "Know your Santa",  
	"@homeTitle": {  
		"description": "Page title.",  
		"context": "HomePage"  
	}  
}
```

The `homeTitle` is the *resource ID* and its value is the localization string (“*Know your Santa*”).
Because `app_en.arb` file is the template file, we have to add an attribute item keyed by original resource id plus a prefix ‘`@`’ character. In the attribute item **optional** we can use predefined resource attributes like:
-   **`description`**: A short paragraph describing the resource and how it is being used by the app, and messages that need to be passed to the localization process and translators. Every attribute item must have description as a requirement.
- **`context`**: It describes the context in which this resource applies. When this piece of information is missing, it defaults to global context.

In the same directory in the `app_hu.arb` file for Hungarian translation of the same string:
```
{  
	"homeTitle": "Ismerd meg a Mikulásod"  
}
```

The comple `app_en.arb` file is as follows:
```
{
  "@@locale": "en",
  "homeTitle": "Know your Santa",
  "@homeTitle": {
    "description": "Page title.",
    "context": "HomePage"
  },
  "homeAppbarTitle": "HomePage",
  "@homeAppbarTitle": {
    "description": "Page title of appbar.",
    "context": "HomePage"
  },
  "homeCurrentLanguage": "Current language: {language}",
  "@homeCurrentLanguage": {
    "description": "Show the current language on the Home page",
    "context": "HomePage",
    "placeholders": {
      "language": {}
    }
  },
  "homeYourSanta": "Your santa",
  "@homeYourSanta": {
    "description": ""
  },
  "santaName": "Santa Claus",
  "@santaName": {
    "description": ""
  },
  "santaHat": "Hat",
  "@santaOutfit1": {
    "description": ""
  },
  "santaTie": "Tie",
  "@santaOutfit2": {
    "description": ""
  },
  "santaDescription": "Jingle bells jingle bells\nJingle all the way\nOh what fun it is to ride\nIn a one horse open sleigh\nJingle bells jingle bells\nJingle all the way\nOh what fun it is to ride\nIn a one horse open sleigh\n\nDashing through the snow\nIn a one horse open sleigh\nOver the fields we go\nLaughing all the way\nBells on bob tail ring\nMaking spirits bright\nOh What fun it is to ride \nA sleighing song tonight\n\nOh, oh jingle bells jingle bells\nJingle all the way\nOh what fun it is to ride\nIn a one horse open sleigh\n\nYou better not pout\nYou better not cry\nYou better not shout\nI'm telling you why\nSanta Claus is coming to town\n\nHe's making a list\nHe's checking it twice\nGonna find out\nWho's naughty or nice\nSanta Claus is coming to town\n\nHe sees you when you're sleeping\nHe knows if you're awake\nHe knows if you've been bad or good\nSo be good for goodness sake\n\nI am dreaming of a white Christmas\nJust like the ones I used to know\nWhere the tree tops glisten\nAnd children listen\nTo hear sleighbells in the snow\nI am dreaming of a white Christmas\nWith every Christmas card I write\nMay your days be merry and bright\nAnd may all your Christmases be\n\nOh, the weather outside is frightful\nBut the fire is so delightful\nAnd since we've got no place to go\nLet it snow, let it snow, let it snow\n\nOh, it doesn't show signs of stopping\nAnd I've brought some corn for popping\nThe lights are turned way down low\nLet it snow, let it snow, let it snow\n\nWhen we finally kiss goodnight\nHow I'll hate going out in the storm\nBut, if you really hold me tight\nAll the way home I'll be warm\n\nThe fire is slowly dying\nAnd my dear, we're still good by ing\nBut, as long as you love me so\nLet it snow, let it snow, let it snow\n\nHere comes Santa Claus\nHere comes Santa Claus\nRight down Santa Claus Lane\nVixen and Blitzen and all his reindeer\nPullin' on the reins\nBells are ringin', children singin'\nAll is merry and bright\nHang your stockings and say your prayers\nSanta Claus comes tonight\n\nHere comes Santa Claus\nHere comes Santa Claus\nRight down Santa Claus Lane\nHe's got a bag that's filled with toys\nFor boys and girls again\nHear those sleigh bells jingle jangle\nOh what a beautiful sight\nJump in bed, and cover your head\nSanta Claus comes tonight\nSanta Claus comes tonight",
  "@santaDescription": {
    "description": ""
  }
}
```


And the `app_hu.arb` file is as follows:
```
{
  "@@locale": "hu",
  "homeTitle": "Ismerd meg a Mikulásod",
  "homeAppbarTitle": "Kezdőlap",
  "homeCurrentLanguage": "Aktuális nyelv: {language}",
  "homeYourSanta": "A mikulásod",
  "santaName": "Mikulás",
  "santaHat": "Kalap",
  "santaTie": "Nyaktekerészeti mellfekvenc",
  "santaDescription": "Hull a pelyhes fehér hó,\njöjj el kedves télapó.\nMinden gyermek várva vár,\nvidám ének hangja száll.\nVan zsákodban minden jó,\npiros alma, mogyoró.\nJöjj el hozzánk, várunk rád,\nkedves öreg télapó!\n\nNagyszakállú télapó,\njó gyermek barátja.\nCukrot, diót, mogyorót\nrejteget a zsákja.\nAmerre jár reggelig,\nkis cipőcske megtelik.\nMegtölti a télapó,\nha üresen látja."
}
```

Whenever we run the application the codegen takes place and in `${FLUTTER_PROJECT}/.dart_tool/flutter_gen/gen_l10n` we see generated files:

-   `l10n.dart`, 
-   `l10n_en.dart`,
-   `l10n_hu.dart`.
      
In the `main.dart` file our `MaterialApp` needed to include `L10n.delegate()` in their app’s `localisationDelegates` list, and the locales we support in the app’s `supportedLocales` list like the following snippet:

``` dart
import 'gen_l10n/l10n.dart';

return MaterialApp(  
	localizationsDelegates: L10n.localizationsDelegates,  
	supportedLocales: L10n.supportedLocales,  
	home: HomePage(),  
);
```

Callers can lookup localized strings with an instance of `L10n` returned by `L10n.of(context)`. For instance, in the `home_page.dart` file in the top of `build()` method of `HomePage` `Widget` we can get the `L10n` object and pass its `homeTitle` to the title text:

``` dart
import 'package:flutter_gen/gen_l10n/l10n.dart';

class  HomePage  extends  StatelessWidget {  

	@override  
	Widget build(BuildContext context) {  
		final L10n l10n = L10n.of(context);  
		  
		return Scaffold(  
			body:  
				//...   
				Text(l10n.homeTitle),   
				//...  
			);  
	}  
}
```

As a result the user can see the home page according to the system setted language of its device:
**TODO: insert screenshot**

### RTL support
`textDirection`

### Text-to-Speech 
`semanticLabel`


## Responsive UI
Once we need to support multiple platforms with different sizes and factors, we'll need to learn about responsive layouts and how to deal with them in Flutter.
### SizedBox vs. FittedBox
TODO
### Wrap
TODO
### Layoutbuilder vs. MediaQuery
The main difference with the [MediaQuery](https://api.flutter.dev/flutter/widgets/MediaQuery-class.html) always provides the size of the full application, info about the physical screen. While [Layoutbuilder](https://api.flutter.dev/flutter/widgets/LayoutBuilder-class.html) actually takes only the current parent size.

TODO sample: Wrap the MediaQuery into a sizeconfig like the [flutter_screenutil](https://pub.dev/packages/flutter_screenutil) package and use it.

## Further reading, materials

- [Internationalizing Flutter apps](https://flutter.dev/docs/development/accessibility-and-localization/internationalization)

- [Creating responsive apps](https://flutter.dev/docs/development/ui/layout/responsive)
- [Developing for Multiple Screen Sizes and Orientations in Flutter](https://medium.com/flutter-community/developing-for-multiple-screen-sizes-and-orientations-in-flutter-fragments-in-flutter-a4c51b849434) by Deven Joshi
- [Build Responsive UIs in Flutter](https://medium.com/flutter-community/build-responsive-uis-in-flutter-fd450bd59158) by Raouf Rahiche
- [How to build responsive layout in Flutter](https://blog.codemagic.io/building-responsive-applications-with-flutter/o) by Souvik Biswas (codemagic)
- [responsive_builder](https://pub.dev/packages/responsive_builder) - Another interesting package
- Used icon by [Icons8](https://icons8.com/vector-creator/illustration/60799f58487a400015ee9ac9)

Commit message:

Add RTL support sentences to 09.md

material/09.md, after:


# Accessibility and responsive UI support on Flutter

In the previous chapters we've learnt how should we implement a Flutter application for ourself, for our devices in our prefered language. We have only one problem with that: 
Luckily not only we will use it. Others will use it as well if we support a11y. 

#### Key abbreviations:
- `a11y`: accessibility
- `i18n`: internationalization
- `l10n`: localization

## Accessibility
  In nutshell, accessibility means that our mobile app is used by as many people as possible. Including we have to make our application accessible to those with disabilities.
 
### Internationalization and localization
If the app might be deployed to users who speak another language then we have to internationalise it. That means we should develop the app in a way that makes it possible to localise values like text and layouts for each language that the app supports.

#### Built-in solution
By default, Flutter only supports US English localizations. To add support for Hungarian language, we can add a package called [flutter_localizations](https://api.flutter.dev/flutter/flutter_localizations/flutter_localizations-library.html) which is the recommended package by the Flutter Team.
To use flutter_localizations, we haveto add it to our `pubspec.yaml` file:

```
dependencies:
  flutter:
    sdk: flutter
  flutter_localizations:
    sdk: flutter 
```

After a successfully completed `pub get packages` command in the `app.dart` file we have to specify additional MaterialApp list type properties like:

- `localizationsDelegates[]`,
- `supportedLocales[]`.

First, we add predefined global values ( `GlobalMaterialLocalizations.delegate`,  `const Locale(’hu’)` ) to make the widgets of the application to be adapted.

After the `flutter_localizations` package was added we add the [intl](https://pub.dev/packages/intl) package, which provides internationalization and localization facilities, including message translation, plurals and genders, date/number formatting and parsing, and bidirectional text. We will use this package as a library with adding it to app’s `pubspec.yaml` file:
```
dependencies:
  intl: ^0.17.0
```
Additionally in `pubspec.yaml` file we should enable the generate flag like the following code section:
```
flutter:  
	generate: true
```
It is essential to generate localizations. For configure where should be placed these generated files, we can add a new `l10n.yaml` file to the root directory of the Flutter project with the following content:

```
arb-dir: lib/l10n  
template-arb-file: app_en.arb  
output-localization-file: l10n.dart  
output-class: L10n
```
With this file we specified the following settings:
-   The input files (`app_en.arb` and `app_hu.arb`) are located in `${FLUTTER_PROJECT}/lib/l10n`,
-   Our `app_en.arb` input file provides the template,
-   The generated localizations are placed in the `l10n.dart` file

In the generated `l10n.dart` file the class name is `L10n`.

In the `app_en.arb` (*ARB* format  = *Application Resource Bundle*) template file we add our default english localization. For example to store the title localization of our home screen we added the following key-values:
```
{  
	"homeTitle": "Know your Santa",  
	"@homeTitle": {  
		"description": "Page title.",  
		"context": "HomePage"  
	}  
}
```

The `homeTitle` is the *resource ID* and its value is the localization string (“*Know your Santa*”).
Because `app_en.arb` file is the template file, we have to add an attribute item keyed by original resource id plus a prefix ‘`@`’ character. In the attribute item **optional** we can use predefined resource attributes like:
-   **`description`**: A short paragraph describing the resource and how it is being used by the app, and messages that need to be passed to the localization process and translators. Every attribute item must have description as a requirement.
- **`context`**: It describes the context in which this resource applies. When this piece of information is missing, it defaults to global context.

In the same directory in the `app_hu.arb` file for Hungarian translation of the same string:
```
{  
	"homeTitle": "Ismerd meg a Mikulásod"  
}
```

The comple `app_en.arb` file is as follows:
```
{
  "@@locale": "en",
  "homeTitle": "Know your Santa",
  "@homeTitle": {
    "description": "Page title.",
    "context": "HomePage"
  },
  "homeAppbarTitle": "HomePage",
  "@homeAppbarTitle": {
    "description": "Page title of appbar.",
    "context": "HomePage"
  },
  "homeCurrentLanguage": "Current language: {language}",
  "@homeCurrentLanguage": {
    "description": "Show the current language on the Home page",
    "context": "HomePage",
    "placeholders": {
      "language": {}
    }
  },
  "homeYourSanta": "Your santa",
  "@homeYourSanta": {
    "description": ""
  },
  "santaName": "Santa Claus",
  "@santaName": {
    "description": ""
  },
  "santaHat": "Hat",
  "@santaOutfit1": {
    "description": ""
  },
  "santaTie": "Tie",
  "@santaOutfit2": {
    "description": ""
  },
  "santaDescription": "Jingle bells jingle bells\nJingle all the way\nOh what fun it is to ride\nIn a one horse open sleigh\nJingle bells jingle bells\nJingle all the way\nOh what fun it is to ride\nIn a one horse open sleigh\n\nDashing through the snow\nIn a one horse open sleigh\nOver the fields we go\nLaughing all the way\nBells on bob tail ring\nMaking spirits bright\nOh What fun it is to ride \nA sleighing song tonight\n\nOh, oh jingle bells jingle bells\nJingle all the way\nOh what fun it is to ride\nIn a one horse open sleigh\n\nYou better not pout\nYou better not cry\nYou better not shout\nI'm telling you why\nSanta Claus is coming to town\n\nHe's making a list\nHe's checking it twice\nGonna find out\nWho's naughty or nice\nSanta Claus is coming to town\n\nHe sees you when you're sleeping\nHe knows if you're awake\nHe knows if you've been bad or good\nSo be good for goodness sake\n\nI am dreaming of a white Christmas\nJust like the ones I used to know\nWhere the tree tops glisten\nAnd children listen\nTo hear sleighbells in the snow\nI am dreaming of a white Christmas\nWith every Christmas card I write\nMay your days be merry and bright\nAnd may all your Christmases be\n\nOh, the weather outside is frightful\nBut the fire is so delightful\nAnd since we've got no place to go\nLet it snow, let it snow, let it snow\n\nOh, it doesn't show signs of stopping\nAnd I've brought some corn for popping\nThe lights are turned way down low\nLet it snow, let it snow, let it snow\n\nWhen we finally kiss goodnight\nHow I'll hate going out in the storm\nBut, if you really hold me tight\nAll the way home I'll be warm\n\nThe fire is slowly dying\nAnd my dear, we're still good by ing\nBut, as long as you love me so\nLet it snow, let it snow, let it snow\n\nHere comes Santa Claus\nHere comes Santa Claus\nRight down Santa Claus Lane\nVixen and Blitzen and all his reindeer\nPullin' on the reins\nBells are ringin', children singin'\nAll is merry and bright\nHang your stockings and say your prayers\nSanta Claus comes tonight\n\nHere comes Santa Claus\nHere comes Santa Claus\nRight down Santa Claus Lane\nHe's got a bag that's filled with toys\nFor boys and girls again\nHear those sleigh bells jingle jangle\nOh what a beautiful sight\nJump in bed, and cover your head\nSanta Claus comes tonight\nSanta Claus comes tonight",
  "@santaDescription": {
    "description": ""
  }
}
```


And the `app_hu.arb` file is as follows:
```
{
  "@@locale": "hu",
  "homeTitle": "Ismerd meg a Mikulásod",
  "homeAppbarTitle": "Kezdőlap",
  "homeCurrentLanguage": "Aktuális nyelv: {language}",
  "homeYourSanta": "A mikulásod",
  "santaName": "Mikulás",
  "santaHat": "Kalap",
  "santaTie": "Nyaktekerészeti mellfekvenc",
  "santaDescription": "Hull a pelyhes fehér hó,\njöjj el kedves télapó.\nMinden gyermek várva vár,\nvidám ének hangja száll.\nVan zsákodban minden jó,\npiros alma, mogyoró.\nJöjj el hozzánk, várunk rád,\nkedves öreg télapó!\n\nNagyszakállú télapó,\njó gyermek barátja.\nCukrot, diót, mogyorót\nrejteget a zsákja.\nAmerre jár reggelig,\nkis cipőcske megtelik.\nMegtölti a télapó,\nha üresen látja."
}
```

Whenever we run the application the codegen takes place and in `${FLUTTER_PROJECT}/.dart_tool/flutter_gen/gen_l10n` we see generated files:

-   `l10n.dart`, 
-   `l10n_en.dart`,
-   `l10n_hu.dart`.
      
In the `main.dart` file our `MaterialApp` needed to include `L10n.delegate()` in their app’s `localisationDelegates` list, and the locales we support in the app’s `supportedLocales` list like the following snippet:

``` dart
import 'gen_l10n/l10n.dart';

return MaterialApp(  
	localizationsDelegates: L10n.localizationsDelegates,  
	supportedLocales: L10n.supportedLocales,  
	home: HomePage(),  
);
```

Callers can lookup localized strings with an instance of `L10n` returned by `L10n.of(context)`. For instance, in the `home_page.dart` file in the top of `build()` method of `HomePage` `Widget` we can get the `L10n` object and pass its `homeTitle` to the title text:

``` dart
import 'package:flutter_gen/gen_l10n/l10n.dart';

class  HomePage  extends  StatelessWidget {  

	@override  
	Widget build(BuildContext context) {  
		final L10n l10n = L10n.of(context);  
		  
		return Scaffold(  
			body:  
				//...   
				Text(l10n.homeTitle),   
				//...  
			);  
	}  
}
```

As a result, the user can see the home page according to the system set language of its device:
**TODO: insert screenshot**

### RTL support
In some languages, for instance, in Arabic writing goes from the right to the left (RTL) instead of from the left to the right like in English or Hungarian. Localization for RTL languages needs only the text direction changing.
To demonstrate RTL support we add `.arb` file including Arabic string resources and we use `start`, `end` properties of `EdgeInsetsDirectional` class instead of the basic `left` and `right` of `EdgeInsets` insets class.

### Text-to-Speech 
`semanticLabel`


## Responsive UI
Once we need to support multiple platforms with different sizes and factors, we'll need to learn about responsive layouts and how to deal with them in Flutter.
### SizedBox vs. FittedBox
TODO
### Wrap
TODO
### Layoutbuilder vs. MediaQuery
The main difference with the [MediaQuery](https://api.flutter.dev/flutter/widgets/MediaQuery-class.html) always provides the size of the full application, info about the physical screen. While [Layoutbuilder](https://api.flutter.dev/flutter/widgets/LayoutBuilder-class.html) actually takes only the current parent size.

TODO sample: Wrap the MediaQuery into a sizeconfig like the [flutter_screenutil](https://pub.dev/packages/flutter_screenutil) package and use it.

## Further reading, materials

- [Internationalizing Flutter apps](https://flutter.dev/docs/development/accessibility-and-localization/internationalization)

- [Creating responsive apps](https://flutter.dev/docs/development/ui/layout/responsive)
- [Developing for Multiple Screen Sizes and Orientations in Flutter](https://medium.com/flutter-community/developing-for-multiple-screen-sizes-and-orientations-in-flutter-fragments-in-flutter-a4c51b849434) by Deven Joshi
- [Build Responsive UIs in Flutter](https://medium.com/flutter-community/build-responsive-uis-in-flutter-fd450bd59158) by Raouf Rahiche
- [How to build responsive layout in Flutter](https://blog.codemagic.io/building-responsive-applications-with-flutter/o) by Souvik Biswas (codemagic)
- [responsive_builder](https://pub.dev/packages/responsive_builder) - Another interesting package
- Used icon by [Icons8](https://icons8.com/vector-creator/illustration/60799f58487a400015ee9ac9)
