
# Accessibility and responsive UI support on Flutter

In the previous chapters we've learnt how should we implement a Flutter application for ourself, for our devices in our prefered language. We have only one problem with that: 
Luckily not only we will use it. Others will use it as well if we support accessibility. 

## Accessibility
TODO

### Internationalization and localization
If the app might be deployed to users who speak another language then we have to internationalise it. That means we should develop the app in a way that makes it possible to localise values like text and layouts for each language that the app supports.

#### Key abbreviations:
- `a11y`:
- `i18n`:
- `l10n`:

#### Built-in solution
By default, Flutter only supports US English localizations. To add support for Hungarian language, we can add a package called [flutter_localizations](https://api.flutter.dev/flutter/flutter_localizations/flutter_localizations-library.html) which is the recommended package by the Flutter Team.
To use flutter_localizations, we haveto add it to our `pubspec.yaml` file:

```
dependencies:
  flutter:
    sdk: flutter
  flutter_localizations:
    sdk: flutter 
```

After a successfully completed `pub get packages` command in the `app.dart` file we have to specify additional MaterialApp list type properties like:

- `localizationsDelegates[]`,
- `supportedLocales[]`.

First, we add predefined global values ( `GlobalMaterialLocalizations.delegate`,  `const Locale(’hu’)` ) to make the widgets of the application to be adapted.

After the `flutter_localizations` package was added we add the [intl](https://pub.dev/packages/intl) package, which provides internationalization and localization facilities, including message translation, plurals and genders, date/number formatting and parsing, and bidirectional text. We will use this package as a library with adding it to app’s `pubspec.yaml` file:
```
dependencies:
  intl: ^0.17.0
```
Additionally in `pubspec.yaml` file we should enable the generate flag like the following code section:
```
flutter:  
	generate: true
```
It is essential to generate localizations. For configure where should be placed these generated files, we can add a new `l10n.yaml` file to the root directory of the Flutter project with the following content:

```
arb-dir: lib/l10n  
template-arb-file: app_en.arb  
output-localization-file: l10n.dart  
output-class: L10n
```
With this file we specified the following settings:
-   The input files (`app_en.arb` and `app_hu.arb`) are located in `${FLUTTER_PROJECT}/lib/l10n`,
-   Our `app_en.arb` input file provides the template,
-   The generated localizations are placed in the `l10n.dart` file

In the generated `l10n.dart` file the class name is `L10n`.

In the `app_en.arb` (*ARB* format  = *Application Resource Bundle*) template file we add our default english localization. For example to store the title localization of our home screen we added the following key-values:
```
{  
	"homeTitle": "Know your Santa",  
	"@homeTitle": {  
		"description": "Page title.",  
		"context": "HomePage"  
	}  
}
```

The `homeTitle` is the *resource ID* and its value is the localization string (“*Warrior seminary!*”).
Because `app_en.arb` file is the template file, we have to add an attribute item keyed by original resource id plus a prefix ‘`@`’ character. In the attribute item **optional** we can use predefined resource attributes like:
-   **`description`**: A short paragraph describing the resource and how it is being used by the app, and messages that need to be passed to the localization process and translators. Every attribute item must have description as a requirement.
- **`context`**: It describes the context in which this resource applies. When this piece of information is missing, it defaults to global context.

In the same directory in the `app_hu.arb` file for Hungarian translation of the same string:
```
{  
	"homeTitle": "Ismerd meg a Mikulásod!"  
}
```
Whenever we run the application the codegen takes place and in `${FLUTTER_PROJECT}/.dart_tool/flutter_gen/gen_l10n` we see generated files:

-   `l10n.dart`, 
-   `l10n_en.dart`,
-   `l10n_hu.dart`.
      
In the `main.dart` file our `MaterialApp` needed to include `L10n.delegate()` in their app’s `localisationDelegates` list, and the locales we support in the app’s `supportedLocales` list like the following snippet:

``` dart
import 'gen_l10n/l10n.dart';

return MaterialApp(  
	localizationsDelegates: L10n.localizationsDelegates,  
	supportedLocales: L10n.supportedLocales,  
	home: HomePage(),  
);
```

Callers can lookup localized strings with an instance of `L10n` returned by `L10n.of(context)`. For instance, in the `home_page.dart` file in the top of `build()` method of `HomePage` `Widget` we can get the `L10n` object and pass its `homeTitle` to the title text:

``` dart
class  HomePage  extends  StatelessWidget {  

	@override  
	Widget build(BuildContext context) {  
		final L10n l10n = L10n.of(context);  
		  
		return Scaffold(  
			body:  
				//...   
				Text(l10n.homeTitle),   
				//...  
			);  
	}  
}
```

As a result the user can see the home page according to the system setted language of its device:
**TODO: insert screenshot**

### RTL support
`textDirection`

### Text-to-Speech 
`semanticLabel`


## Responsive UI
Once we need to support multiple platforms with different sizes and factors, we'll need to learn about responsive layouts and how to deal with them in Flutter.
### SizedBox vs. FittedBox
TODO
### Wrap
TODO
### Layoutbuilder vs. MediaQuery
The main difference with the [MediaQuery](https://api.flutter.dev/flutter/widgets/MediaQuery-class.html) always provides the size of the full application, info about the physical screen. While [Layoutbuilder](https://api.flutter.dev/flutter/widgets/LayoutBuilder-class.html) actually takes only the current parent size.

TODO sample: Wrap the MediaQuery into a sizeconfig like the [flutter_screenutil](https://pub.dev/packages/flutter_screenutil) package and use it.

## Further reading, materials

- [Internationalizing Flutter apps](https://flutter.dev/docs/development/accessibility-and-localization/internationalization)

- [Creating responsive apps](https://flutter.dev/docs/development/ui/layout/responsive)
- [Developing for Multiple Screen Sizes and Orientations in Flutter](https://medium.com/flutter-community/developing-for-multiple-screen-sizes-and-orientations-in-flutter-fragments-in-flutter-a4c51b849434) by Deven Joshi
- [Build Responsive UIs in Flutter](https://medium.com/flutter-community/build-responsive-uis-in-flutter-fd450bd59158) by Raouf Rahiche
- [How to build responsive layout in Flutter](https://blog.codemagic.io/building-responsive-applications-with-flutter/o) by Souvik Biswas (codemagic)
- [responsive_builder](https://pub.dev/packages/responsive_builder) - Another interesting package
- Used icon by [Icons8](https://icons8.com/vector-creator/illustration/60799f58487a400015ee9ac9)
