material/11.md, before:


# Chapter 11: How to use Platform-specific APIs with Platform Channels and testing Flutter Apps  
  
In the previous chapters we've learned how could we use Flutter APIs. We also got tons of plugins that help us to provide native features.  
  
## Platform-specific APIs  
What does exactly a native feature mean? The native features are APIs that we can use platform-specifically. The following list shows some of the key platform-specific features:  
- using the **camera**,  
- using the **microphone**,  
- access to location data from **GPS** and show it with Google Maps,  
- access to the device **secure storage**,  
- access to **motion sensors**,  
- access to **humidity sensor**,
- access to **Bluetooth sensor**,  
- access to **NFC chip**,
- etc.  
  
Sometimes we need to use one of them and maybe there is no plugin available.  
  
  
Fortunately, using the `Platform channels`, we could easily run platform native code (code written in `Objective C`, `Swift`, `Java` or `Kotlin`).  
  
### Platform Channels  
Flutter gives us platform channels as a bridge between the client (_UI_) and host (_platform_) and we could pass events through them.  
  
The following diagram gives an overview of Platform channels architecture.  
   
![Architectural overview: platform channels](./images/11_platform_channels.png)  
  
As we can see in the diagram, we could send events using `MethodChannel` from the Flutter to native and vice versa.  
  
> Note that sending events is an asynchronous process in the Flutter's Dart side, but despite this, whenever we invoke a channel method, we must invoke that method on the platform's UI (main) thread.  
  
  
#### Type support  
The standard platform channels need a **name** and a **codec** for *serializing* / *deserializing* messages to binary form and back. Dart platform channel types and codecs are illustrated in the following table:  
![Supported types](./images/11_platform_channels_types.png)  
  
#### Sending a Method invoking from Flutter  
Firstly, we have to create our Platform Channel with adding a unique id like an url like the following snippet:  
```dart  
import 'package:flutter/services.dart'; 
 
const platformChannel = const MethodChannel('hu.bme.aut.flutter/data');  
```  
  
After that we could send a request with calling `invokeMethod()` method with passing the name of method of the native side. Unfortunately, things can go wrong so we should add try-catch block because if the communication with the platform fails for any reason, we want to be prepares to handle that error like this:  
```dart  
try {  
  final int result = await platformChannel.invokeMethod('getPlatformSpecificData');  
  _platformSpecificData = "$result in Celsius";
} on PlatformException catch (error) {  
  _platformSpecificData =  "Failed to get platform specific data: '${error.message}'."; 
}
```  
  
  
#### Running native Android code  
Start by finding the Android host portion of our Flutter application. After that open the `MainActivity.kt` located in **java** or our **kotlin** folder.

Inside the `MainActivity` we have to create and configure our `FlutterEngine`. For that we could override `configureFlutterEngine()` method of `FlutterActivity` class like this:
  ```dart  
import androidx.annotation.NonNull
import io.flutter.embedding.android.FlutterActivity
import io.flutter.embedding.engine.FlutterEngine
import io.flutter.plugin.common.MethodChannel 


class MainActivity : FlutterActivity() {

    private val CHANNEL = "hu.bme.aut.flutter/data"

    override fun configureFlutterEngine(@NonNull flutterEngine: FlutterEngine) {
        super.configureFlutterEngine(flutterEngine)
        MethodChannel(flutterEngine.dartExecutor.binaryMessenger, CHANNEL).setMethodCallHandler { call, result ->
            // Note: this method is invoked on the main thread.
            // TODO
        }
    }

}
  ``` 

> Don't forget to add the necessary imports by manually this time.  

Inside the above-mentioned `configureFlutterEngine()` method we can create our `MethodChannel` with the same **name** what we use in the Flutter side. Next, we register a method call handler on our channel. The `MethodCallHandler` is responsible for handling several specified method calls received from Flutter. 
Previously, we specified a method with the `getPlatformSpecificData` string so in the body of `setMethodCallHandler()`'s lambda we handle it like the following code snippet:
```kotlin
MethodChannel(flutterEngine.dartExecutor.binaryMessenger, CHANNEL).setMethodCallHandler { call, result ->  
  // Note: this method is invoked on the main thread.  
  if (call.method == "getPlatformSpecificData") {  
        val currentTemp = getPlatformSpecificData()  
        if (currentTemp != null) {  
            result.success(currentTemp)  
        } else {  
            result.error("UNAVAILABLE", "Temperature level not available.", null)  
        }  
    } else {  
        result.notImplemented()  
    }  
}
```
Handler implementations must submit a `result` for all incoming `MethodCall`, by making a single call on the given `Result` callback. To achieve this, we can handle our results with the `success()` and `error()` functions. Failure to do so will result in lengthy Flutter result handlers. The result may be submitted asynchronously. Calls to unknown or unimplemented methods can be handled using `.notImplemented()` call.

> Note that If no handler has been registered, any incoming method call on this channel will be handled automatically by sending a `null` reply.

In the success case our `getPlatformSpecificData()` function provides us a valid requested `currentTemp` value. Under the hood, we have to implement the `SensorEventListener` interface for receiving new sensor data from the native `android.hardware.SensorManager` class. In the [flutter_platform_channels_basic](../projects/chapters/chapter_11/flutter_platform_channels_basic/) example you can find a short solution for `TYPE_AMBIENT_TEMPERATURE` measurement under the `sensor specific code` `region` comments. These are the native lines of code that we don’t need to implement if we have a available flutter package.

#### Running native iOS code
Briefly, to achive the result in the iOS side, we have to edit the `AppDelegate.swift` file in `ios/Runner`. 
>The `AppDelegate` is the core singleton that is part of the app initialization process.

First, we need to override the `application:didFinishLaunchingWithOptions:` function and create a `FlutterMethodChannel` with using its proper name `hu.bme.aut.flutter/data` like this:

##### [ios/Runner/AppDelegate.swift]
```swift
import UIKit  
import Flutter  
  
@UIApplicationMain  
@objc class AppDelegate: FlutterAppDelegate {  
  override func application(  
    _ application: UIApplication,  
    didFinishLaunchingWithOptions launchOptions: [UIApplication.LaunchOptionsKey: Any]?) -> Bool {  
  
    let controller : FlutterViewController = window?.rootViewController as! FlutterViewController  
        let channel = FlutterMethodChannel(name: "hu.bme.aut.flutter/data",  
                                                  binaryMessenger: controller.binaryMessenger)  
        channel.setMethodCallHandler({  
          [weak self] (call: FlutterMethodCall, result: FlutterResult) -> Void in  
          // Note: this method is invoked on the UI thread.  
          guard call.method == "getPlatformSpecificData" else {  
            result(FlutterMethodNotImplemented)  
            return  
          }  
          self?.getPlatformSpecificData(result: result)  
        })  
  
    GeneratedPluginRegistrant.register(with: self)  
    return super.application(application, didFinishLaunchingWithOptions: launchOptions)  
  }  
  
  private func getPlatformSpecificData(result: FlutterResult) {  
      result(30)  
    }  
}
```
#### Add Flutter to an existing mobile app
Flutter could be integrated into our **existing** native Android or iOS application, as a **library** or a **module**.

[Integrate a Flutter module into your Android project](https://flutter.dev/docs/development/add-to-app/android/project-setup)  

  
## Introduction to test Flutter applications  
WIP
  
### Unit tests  
  
#### Writing the first unit test  
  
#### Testing model classes  
  
#### Testing Platform Channels  
  
#### Testing BloCs  
  
### Widget tests  
WIP  
  
## Further reading, materials  
  
- [Writing custom platform-specific code](https://flutter.dev/docs/development/platform-integration/platform-channels)  
- [Flutter Platform Channels](https://medium.com/flutter/flutter-platform-channels-ce7f540a104e) by Mikkel Ravn  
- [Intro to Platform Channels: Building an Image Picker in Flutter](https://codewithandrea.com/articles/platform-channels-flutter/) by Andrea Bizzotto  
- [Your Own Image Picker With Flutter Channels](https://www.raywenderlich.com/2882495-your-own-image-picker-with-flutter-channels) by JB Lorenzo  
  
- [Testing Flutter apps](https://flutter.dev/docs/testing)  
- [An introduction to unit testing](https://flutter.dev/docs/cookbook/testing/unit/introduction)  
- [Mock dependencies using Mockito](https://flutter.dev/docs/cookbook/testing/unit/mocking)  
- [An introduction to widget testing](https://flutter.dev/docs/cookbook/testing/widget/introduction)

Commit message:

Add a brief intro for tests.

material/11.md, after:


# Chapter 11: How to use Platform-specific APIs with Platform Channels and testing Flutter Apps  
  
In the previous chapters we've learned how could we use Flutter APIs. We also got tons of plugins that help us to provide native features.  
  
## Platform-specific APIs  
What does exactly a native feature mean? The native features are APIs that we can use platform-specifically. The following list shows some of the key platform-specific features:  
- using the **camera**,  
- using the **microphone**,  
- access to location data from **GPS** and show it with Google Maps,  
- access to the device **secure storage**,  
- access to **motion sensors**,  
- access to **humidity sensor**,
- access to **Bluetooth sensor**,  
- access to **NFC chip**,
- etc.  
  
Sometimes we need to use one of them and maybe there is no plugin available.  
  
  
Fortunately, using the `Platform channels`, we could easily run platform native code (code written in `Objective C`, `Swift`, `Java` or `Kotlin`).  
  
### Platform Channels  
Flutter gives us platform channels as a bridge between the client (_UI_) and host (_platform_) and we could pass events through them.  
  
The following diagram gives an overview of Platform channels architecture.  
   
![Architectural overview: platform channels](./images/11_platform_channels.png)  
  
As we can see in the diagram, we could send events using `MethodChannel` from the Flutter to native and vice versa.  
  
> Note that sending events is an asynchronous process in the Flutter's Dart side, but despite this, whenever we invoke a channel method, we must invoke that method on the platform's UI (main) thread.  
  
  
#### Type support  
The standard platform channels need a **name** and a **codec** for *serializing* / *deserializing* messages to binary form and back. Dart platform channel types and codecs are illustrated in the following table:  
![Supported types](./images/11_platform_channels_types.png)  
  
#### Sending a Method invoking from Flutter  
Firstly, we have to create our Platform Channel with adding a unique id like an url like the following snippet:  
```dart  
import 'package:flutter/services.dart'; 
 
const platformChannel = const MethodChannel('hu.bme.aut.flutter/data');  
```  
  
After that we could send a request with calling `invokeMethod()` method with passing the name of method of the native side. Unfortunately, things can go wrong so we should add try-catch block because if the communication with the platform fails for any reason, we want to be prepares to handle that error like this:  
```dart  
try {  
  final int result = await platformChannel.invokeMethod('getPlatformSpecificData');  
  _platformSpecificData = "$result in Celsius";
} on PlatformException catch (error) {  
  _platformSpecificData =  "Failed to get platform specific data: '${error.message}'."; 
}
```  
  
  
#### Running native Android code  
Start by finding the Android host portion of our Flutter application. After that open the `MainActivity.kt` located in **java** or our **kotlin** folder.

Inside the `MainActivity` we have to create and configure our `FlutterEngine`. For that we could override `configureFlutterEngine()` method of `FlutterActivity` class like this:
  ```dart  
import androidx.annotation.NonNull
import io.flutter.embedding.android.FlutterActivity
import io.flutter.embedding.engine.FlutterEngine
import io.flutter.plugin.common.MethodChannel 


class MainActivity : FlutterActivity() {

    private val CHANNEL = "hu.bme.aut.flutter/data"

    override fun configureFlutterEngine(@NonNull flutterEngine: FlutterEngine) {
        super.configureFlutterEngine(flutterEngine)
        MethodChannel(flutterEngine.dartExecutor.binaryMessenger, CHANNEL).setMethodCallHandler { call, result ->
            // Note: this method is invoked on the main thread.
            // TODO
        }
    }

}
  ``` 

> Don't forget to add the necessary imports by manually this time.  

Inside the above-mentioned `configureFlutterEngine()` method we can create our `MethodChannel` with the same **name** what we use in the Flutter side. Next, we register a method call handler on our channel. The `MethodCallHandler` is responsible for handling several specified method calls received from Flutter. 
Previously, we specified a method with the `getPlatformSpecificData` string so in the body of `setMethodCallHandler()`'s lambda we handle it like the following code snippet:
```kotlin
MethodChannel(flutterEngine.dartExecutor.binaryMessenger, CHANNEL).setMethodCallHandler { call, result ->  
  // Note: this method is invoked on the main thread.  
  if (call.method == "getPlatformSpecificData") {  
        val currentTemp = getPlatformSpecificData()  
        if (currentTemp != null) {  
            result.success(currentTemp)  
        } else {  
            result.error("UNAVAILABLE", "Temperature level not available.", null)  
        }  
    } else {  
        result.notImplemented()  
    }  
}
```
Handler implementations must submit a `result` for all incoming `MethodCall`, by making a single call on the given `Result` callback. To achieve this, we can handle our results with the `success()` and `error()` functions. Failure to do so will result in lengthy Flutter result handlers. The result may be submitted asynchronously. Calls to unknown or unimplemented methods can be handled using `.notImplemented()` call.

> Note that If no handler has been registered, any incoming method call on this channel will be handled automatically by sending a `null` reply.

In the success case our `getPlatformSpecificData()` function provides us a valid requested `currentTemp` value. Under the hood, we have to implement the `SensorEventListener` interface for receiving new sensor data from the native `android.hardware.SensorManager` class. In the [flutter_platform_channels_basic](../projects/chapters/chapter_11/flutter_platform_channels_basic/) example you can find a short solution for `TYPE_AMBIENT_TEMPERATURE` measurement under the `sensor specific code` `region` comments. These are the native lines of code that we don’t need to implement if we have a available flutter package.

#### Running native iOS code
Briefly, to achive the result in the iOS side, we have to edit the `AppDelegate.swift` file in `ios/Runner`. 
>The `AppDelegate` is the core singleton that is part of the app initialization process.

First, we need to override the `application:didFinishLaunchingWithOptions:` function and create a `FlutterMethodChannel` with using its proper name `hu.bme.aut.flutter/data` like this:

##### [ios/Runner/AppDelegate.swift]
```swift
import UIKit  
import Flutter  
  
@UIApplicationMain  
@objc class AppDelegate: FlutterAppDelegate {  
  override func application(  
    _ application: UIApplication,  
    didFinishLaunchingWithOptions launchOptions: [UIApplication.LaunchOptionsKey: Any]?) -> Bool {  
  
    let controller : FlutterViewController = window?.rootViewController as! FlutterViewController  
        let channel = FlutterMethodChannel(name: "hu.bme.aut.flutter/data",  
                                                  binaryMessenger: controller.binaryMessenger)  
        channel.setMethodCallHandler({  
          [weak self] (call: FlutterMethodCall, result: FlutterResult) -> Void in  
          // Note: this method is invoked on the UI thread.  
          guard call.method == "getPlatformSpecificData" else {  
            result(FlutterMethodNotImplemented)  
            return  
          }  
          self?.getPlatformSpecificData(result: result)  
        })  
  
    GeneratedPluginRegistrant.register(with: self)  
    return super.application(application, didFinishLaunchingWithOptions: launchOptions)  
  }  
  
  private func getPlatformSpecificData(result: FlutterResult) {  
      result(30)  
    }  
}
```
#### Add Flutter to an existing mobile app
Flutter could be integrated into our **existing** native Android or iOS application, as a **library** or a **module**.
For more details on this topic, you should check the official [Integrate a Flutter module into your Android project](https://flutter.dev/docs/development/add-to-app/android/project-setup) documentation.

  
## Introduction to test Flutter applications
Before diving into how we test our above-mentioned Platform channels and other projects, we'll look at the base test categories of testing with their official short terms:

- A [unit test](https://flutter.dev/docs/testing#unit-tests) tests a single function, method, or class.
- A [widget test](https://flutter.dev/docs/testing#widget-tests) (in other UI frameworks referred to as component test) tests a single widget.
- An [integration test](https://flutter.dev/docs/testing#integration-tests) tests a complete app or a large part of an ap

Why should we test anything?
Testing is an important requirement to deliver applications with the best quality. A good test code coverage can be a measure of quality for production software.

Unfortunately, in this chapter, we don’t have enough time and opportunities to convince you to write tests, follow the [TDD](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Test-driven_development), but we'll take look at the basic tools.

### Unit tests  
Unit tests are responsible for testing separated business logic. The isolating is very important, and if we have some external dependencies of one unit we have to [mock out](https://flutter.dev/docs/cookbook/testing/unit/mocking) them. To mock dependencies, we can use the recommended [Mockito package](https://pub.dev/packages/mockito).

#### Writing the first unit test  
  
#### Testing model classes  
  
#### Testing Platform Channels  
  
#### Testing BloCs  
  
### Widget tests  
WIP  
  
## Further reading, materials  
  
- [Writing custom platform-specific code](https://flutter.dev/docs/development/platform-integration/platform-channels)  
- [Flutter Platform Channels](https://medium.com/flutter/flutter-platform-channels-ce7f540a104e) by Mikkel Ravn  
- [Intro to Platform Channels: Building an Image Picker in Flutter](https://codewithandrea.com/articles/platform-channels-flutter/) by Andrea Bizzotto  
- [Your Own Image Picker With Flutter Channels](https://www.raywenderlich.com/2882495-your-own-image-picker-with-flutter-channels) by JB Lorenzo  
  
- [Testing Flutter apps](https://flutter.dev/docs/testing)  
- [An introduction to unit testing](https://flutter.dev/docs/cookbook/testing/unit/introduction)  
- [Mock dependencies using Mockito](https://flutter.dev/docs/cookbook/testing/unit/mocking)  
- [An introduction to widget testing](https://flutter.dev/docs/cookbook/testing/widget/introduction)
